Becoming an engineering manager,
let's talk about the common motivation for
people.
They show up in control,
people think they're more in control.
They think there's more money,
they're prestige,
bigger impacts, yeah, maybe or maybe not.
Growth, and the challenge of doing it.
A common motivation of people who come
into engineering manager, control.
I'll be in charge,
I'll be the shot caller for the team.
The truth is,
you have less control than you did before.
Because here's the truth about dealing
with people, and something that if you
haven't thought about it until now,
this is gonna blow your mind.
You can't make anybody do anything,
and you're,
yeah, I can bribe somebody and
they'll do something.
I'm, you still can't make them do
anything, they're still making a choice.
I can twist their arm and
yeah, you can say injure them,
I don't recommend doing that, but
you can or you can threaten them.
But you still can't make them do anything
they're still making a choice there,
sometimes it's a non choice, but
you still can't make anybody do anything.
And this is the truth of dealing with
people, is you have to convince them.
You have to figure out
what's their motivation and
try to get them to see your perspective,
and many other strategies.
But you can't make anybody do anything.
You're, well I can fire them,
and I can threaten their job.
I'm, you can, but
you still can't make them do it.
They're gonna be, okay, see you, I'm gonna
work across the street at your competitor.
>> And then do you wanna do that?
Then it makes it harder to
convince them in the future.
>> It's the nuclear option.
>> Right.
>> Yeah, and you're right.
And the truth is you still
can't make them do it.
They could be, [LAUGH] all right,
see you, give you the middle finger,
walk out the door.
And this is something you really have to
understand, is you're not in control,
you're shepherding people,
you're guiding them.
But at the end of the day,
people are making their independent
people with their own backgrounds, their
own way of thinking and seeing the world
and they're making decisions without you.
And that's something you
really have to recognize.
Probably, I mean, well, how how many
of you have ever had a bad manager or
a bad boss doesn't matter in fact tech?
Yeah, almost everybody.
And probably one of the worst
things they can do.
And there's many ways of being a bad
manager or a bad leader as we'll get into.
But this one's probably one of the worst
ones, is people that become a leader, be,
I'm in charge,
I'm gonna boss people around.
And you can for a time, like we said,
but they're gonna leave.
They're gonna underperform, they're
gonna talk about you behind your back.
And generally, your performance
gonna get worse over time.
And it drives people who are motivated
by control, it drives them bonkers.
I'm yelling at the team every day [LAUGH]
and they're still not working any harder,
why isn't this working?
And I've had plenty of experience
with managers like that,
just I wanna be in control.
And the truth is, to be a good leader,
you have to give up control and
you have to accept that.
And once you do, it changes your
perspective on getting people to do things
or showing them what they should do.
And the truth is,
when it comes to software engineering,
the software engineers have
way more control than you do.
You're not writing code generally,
they are.
So when you talk about control,
who's actually doing the work here?
It's other people, so being in
charge is not a good motivation for
being a software engineer.
And you are in charge to some degree,
you do have to call shots, but
if you're doing it for the control,
you're not gonna do well.
It may not show up immediately,
but it will show up eventually.
Money, people think managers and
people managers get paid more,
that is not the truth.
I won't say how much money I make, but I'm
not the highest paid person on my team,
and that's fun,
I have.no problem with that at all.
It's about value you provide the company,
I have a team of really,
really smart engineers,
and they do a lot, and
the business say they
provide more value than I do.
That's okay, I'm totally fine with that.
But there's this myth that once you become
a manager, you're gonna make more money.
Not true, it is not true at all.
I'm fortunate to be able to set
compensation and see market data for
how much different roles get paid.
And yes, software engineers are majors or
somewhere in the middle there.
The truth is, though, as you go up,
the salary bands are higher for
becoming a VP or CTO, things like that.
But again, the rarity of those roles
is such that, what's it called?
What's the math term, the expected value?
Your expected value is actually
better as a software engineer.
If you're saying, in the long term,
I wanna make more money,
that's my motivation, which is fine.
We don't work for free, we've got bills
to pay, we've got Ferraris to polish.
>> [LAUGH]
>> You're better off being a software
engineer if you're just in it for
the money.
And then again, all that expected value,
there's just less roles,
we talked about that earlier.
And there's less job security,
who in the latest rounds of the tech
downturn that we've all been dealing with?
Who are some of the first people to get
laid off, is it software engineers?
It's managers, and then they
consolidate teams under other managers.
And that's the truth, the further up
you go, the less job security you have.
Every time there's a reorganization,
or there's a new CTO in charge,
a new VP of engineering.
A lot of times what happens is they swap
out all the people that report to them for
other people that they know who
match their leadership style.
And that's a risk you have,
and when that happens,
you have less roles available to you.
So the motivation of money, it's not
a strong one, everybody has their own, but
it's just not true.
And again, today comes as a shock,
I'm just trying to share what I know and
the truth about things.
Prestige, the title, engineering manager.
Sounds good, looks good on LinkedIn.
And people think what's perceived comes
respects, and that's not true at all.
Maybe externally, maybe there's things
the world values other people's value.
But the truth is, the title means nothing,
to your team it just means that now
you're the one setting competition.
There's a lot of responsibilities
that come with the role, but
doesn't mean they respect to you.
You have to earn that, and
it doesn't come with a title.
And this is true for
anywhere you go in your career,
you have to earn people's respect,
it doesn't come by default.
And the truth is when you're making this
transition to engineering management,
you start at zero.
You are now the worst person on your team,
where you are a senior software engineer
or whatever role software engineer.
You actually produced something you had
skills that were valuable to the company,
the mini become an engineering manager for
the first time.
You're the lowest on the team,
you know the least,
about the role you should be doing, and
it's important to be humble about that.
It's something I didn't
really think of in my
transition was, I'm at zero again.
And again, management is a role change,
it is not better,
it's not worse, it's a different
role in software engineering.
So prestige,
if your parents are proud, whatever.
I think externally people look at,
you're a manager, you must be up here.
But the reality is you're just
another person on the team, and
that's why I tell my team all the time.
My job is to make your life easier,
to remove reduced friction,
to give you guidance to
set long term direction.
And to be the umbrella that keeps you
all shielded from the business side and
all the things you shouldn't
have to worry about.
But is there prestige there?
I don't think so, I don't think a leader
should think of themselves that way.
Impact, I can make a difference.
This is true,
I think this is fine motivation.
It was actually one of my
motivations to become a manager.
You can make an impact,
you will make an impact.
And everybody's,
a positive impact, I'm, yeah.
Or a negative impact, so
you don't think of that other side of.
The more impact you can have, the bigger
the blast radius if you're wrong.
It's something else to think about,
you will make mistakes,
I've made plenty of mistakes.
And those mistakes are way more
costly as an engineering manager.
So, if you're, I wanna make
more of a change, you can, but
think about the risk that comes with that,
of being wrong.
And the truth is the impacts that you
will make, it's way less tangible.
You know what I miss about
software engineering?
Is the binary nature of it's
either it works or it doesn't.
Sometimes I don't know why it works,
sometimes I don't know why it
doesn't work, somewhere between.
And there's such a purity and beauty in
that, in solving these hard problems,
closing a ticket, pushing code, and
you see it reflecting in production.
You don't get any of that
as an engineering manager.
Your successes are based on the team,
the failures are yours and
that's just how it works as a good leader.
So any impact you have
is way less tangible.
Even now as doing this for
coming up on three years,
it takes a lot of looking back to
see where we started as a team,
when I first became a manager and
where we are today.
To be, yeah, I did do that.
But it's only looking back, when you're
in the middle of it, you don't see it,
you won't feel it.
Sometimes you get lucky and you have
a good team meeting with teams fighting.
You're, okay, this feels good,
but those are very short lives.
In general,
all the impact you have is less tangible,
and you can't actually prove it.
You ever ship the big piece of software,
and you're really proud of it, and
maybe hopefully your manager is,
great job team?
That manager there is questioning,
did they actually do anything,
cuz they didn't write any code?
That's something you have to accept as a
manager, is your impact is less tangible,
and you have to just believe that you're
doing something, cuz you won't see it.
There's no metrics saying,
you did something, and
that impact takes a long time to see.
Like I said, quarters and
years it takes to see that impact.
Most, and
this is why the general recommendation for
becoming a software engineering manager is
you have to do it for at least two years.
If you do it for a year, you're gonna be,
I'm not really doing anything,
this doesn't feel good,
cuz you won't see it.
It takes about two years to kind of
understand what you're doing finally and
see, yeah, we are shipping things better.
The team is talking better,
our partners are happier,
we're moving the business
metrics we need to.
But that takes a very long time to see,
and
that's probably one of the hardest
parts of this transition.
If you're used to shipping code,
solving things,
really binary,
easy to see impacting decisions.
That's gone as an engineer manager.
And truth is, the bigger the impact,
the more scrutiny you have on your role.
If your team is arguing,
they don't show prepared for meetings,
people aren't happy with them.
Even individuals in your team,
that's your problem now.
They're not gonna be but so and so.
I know they have personal problems and
they're arguing with their partner a lot,
they're not sleeping well.
And that's why they're showing up poorly
in meetings and not delivering things.
Nobody says that about the person,
they look to you cuz your
team is your responsibility.
So you have a lot more scrutiny,
but you also have more impact, so
it is a trade-off.
Just things to think about when you
think about what are your motivations.
Mentoring growing people,
I love growing people.
There's very little as satisfying as
seeing someone struggling with something,
you're coaching and mentoring.
And then few months, maybe a couple of
years later, they're much better at it.
A common one is public speaking,
people usually shy away,
especially software engineers,
from public speaking.
And then that moment when they
get up there and present, and
you're, is this the same person?
It's so rewarding, but that takes so much
time to see, people don't change in a day.
If you have a bad habit now,
how long does it take to drop a bad habit?
Could take years,
that's the truth about growing people,
is that will take years and
you don't control it.
You can't, let's go back to the beginning,
you can't make anybody do anything.
You're, hey, Jane, you're really
argumentative in meetings, and
you have great ideas, but
people don't wanna listen to you, and
they're, yeah, I hear that.
And then a week or two later, same thing,
a couple months later, same thing.
And you're coaching and
mentoring them, but it's not changing.
And that can be really frustrating,
cuz you're, it's such an obvious problem,
if you fix it, you'd be up here.
But you can't control that.
And that's the truth about growing and
mentoring people, is it's rewarding, but
it's also challenging.
But to me it is one of the most satisfying
aspects of the position you can have as
an engineering manager.
And if your motivation is a challenge,
that's a good motivation,
[LAUGH] it's a challenge.
You will always be learning something new,
always, cuz people,
they're all different,
people don't fit into a box.
So if you're in it for the challenge
it'll be a challenge [LAUGH].
And if you're not being challenged,
you're probably not doing it right.
You should be challenging yourself and
challenging your team and
challenging your partners.